The Eco-Programmer's Dilemma
########################################################################
:date: 2018-06-15 10:36
:author: jmercouris
:category: Uncategorized
:slug: eco-programmer
:status: published
:description: Every engineer and programmer carries a responsibility
              for our environment.

The Problem
========================================================================
If you ride the bike to work to save the planet, consider optimizing
your loop code instead. According to The Guardian, the Internet
releases around 300 million tonnes of CO2 annually- the combined
equivalent of all the coal and oil burned in Turkey and Poland.

Needless to say, this impact is significant, and it stems from deep
inefficiencies in computer hardware and software. We can do something
about it. As software engineers, we have the ability to multiply our
positive impact on the environment by writing better, faster software.

Moore's law predicted that the number of transistors in a given area
would double approximately every two years. With this speed
improvement came the oft-quoted wisdom: "programmer time is more
important than CPU time".

As a consequence of this "wisdom"- heavy, all-in-one solutions began
to flood the market. All of these products were designed with a
singular goal: reducing developer time. This reduction in developer
time was offset by a higher CPU cost. This CPU cost has a price, the
future of our planet.

The typical businessman may argue that time to market, agility, and
ease of development are more important than CPU time. But, there is a
hidden tax: any time one of these massive monolithic frameworks is
employed (I'm looking at you electron), excessive amounts of carbon
and fossil fuels are being deposited into our atmosphere. Will the
company pay any taxes to offset their carbon? Will they plant trees?

As a programmer, you are the last bulwark against irreversible damage
to humanity's home. It is your duty to inform and explain the impacts
and costs associated with building atop inefficient platforms. A
short term gain now (possibly releasing a product a month earlier),
against long-term damage against the ecosystem (guaranteed). You have
to make the case clear. Illustrate exactly how much carbon impact
a particular platform or technology may make.

I can't convince my managers, can I still help?
========================================================================
Of course you can! There are plenty of ways that you can help. You can
begin by spreading awareness to the issue. You can make it part of
your ethos and your integrity as a programmer to write more efficient
code. Whenever you write some elegant, efficient piece of code and
some other developer reuses it, you've again, multiplied your impact.

Small changes in efficiencies throughout a code-base can mean huge
overall changes on application, and environmental performance. So, do
what you can, where you can, and together we can make a huge
difference.

Final Thoughts
========================================================================
I am not advocating complete obfuscation and optimization in the sake
of performance. I am advocating a lens of responsibility that we must
use when assessing a technology. The energy impact and usage of
computers is too great to ignore. If we were to treat compute power as
a precious resource our computers would have longer lives, burn less
energy, and make the world a lot cleaner.
