Bicycle Lighting
################
:date: 2015-05-22 22:00
:author: jmercouris
:category: Hardware
:slug: bicycle-lighting
:status: published

The Original Bike: Commuter & Mini Tourer
=========================================

In December of 2014, I purchased a bicycle with the intention of riding
it on my daily commute. In addition to using it for commuting, I planned
on using it for short distance touring among popular trails in Berlin.
Examples of this include the Berlin Mauerweg (http://mauerweg.com); a
guided trip tracing the historic location of the Berlin wall.

The trips I envisioned were on the scale of 60-100 kilometers in length.
For this length of trip, it is often necessary to carry provisions for
tires, water, and food; one of the requirements therefore is for a
pannier rack. A pannier rack is necessary if you wish to carry any
considerable load on your bicycle without getting exhausted.

When I first purchased the bicycle it looked like the following:

|IMG_3323|

It had front and rear lights, splash guards, brakes, and a front/rear
derailleur. It was optimally setup for commuting over a nice mixture of
hard and soft surfaces with a focus on paved roads.

Customization and Modification: Pannier Rack
============================================

After finding a pannier rack that suited my needs, I installed it, and
the bike looked like this:

|IMG_3466|

As is evident from the above photo, the location of the rear light now
presented a serious problem. The light would probably not be visible to
drivers as easily, and would interfere with the placement of luggage on
the rack.

Fortunately I had anticipated this problem and purchased a pannier rack
with a mount on the rear for a light. If you look closely in the above
photo, you will notice a flat section at the very end of of the pannier
rack with holes drilled in for mounting lights/reflectors.

The Plan & Materials
====================

I went to the local bike store, and picked up a brighter nicer light to
replace my old light. At the same time I also went to the local hardware
store and picked up several mounting materials: new wire to reach the
new light location, zip ties for a tidy install, and electrical
junctions to separate the wiring integrated on the pannier / bike frame.

|IMG_3474|

I would also be using only a few tools for this entire process; my multi
faced socket wrench, a knife, and my multi hex / flat / phillips tool.

Work Begins
===========

The first step involved flipping over the bike to make it easier to work
on.

|IMG_3473|

After flipping the bike, it was necessary to remove the rear wheel to
gain easier access to the wiring and lighting system.

|IMG_3477|

With the rear wheel now removed, I could easily set about removing the
light:

|IMG_3476|

After removing the old light, I discovered that on bicycles they simply
use a type of tension fastener similar to speakers. You place the wire
leads into the light enclosure and then depress a tab securing them in
place.

|IMG_3478|

Justification of the Pannier Bicycle Junction
=============================================

With the old light and wiring removed, it was time to set about creating
the interface between the pannier rack and the bicycle. Because it is
sometimes necessary to remove the pannier from the bicycle (maintenance
etc), I wanted it to be a quick disconnect at the interface between the
two.

Due to the nature of securing wiring to the pannier, it was not possible
to simply use the existing bicycle method of quick disconnects at the
light interface. The issue with this is that the wiring extends onto the
pannier, and once on the pannier must be secured with zip ties.
Therefore, when removing the pannier, it would still be tethered to the
bicycle via the power cable. To overcome this issue, the junction was
placed between the pannier and bicycle. The junction can simply be
loosened and the pannier/light assembly can be removed in one piece.

|IMG_3480|

If the above was confusing, the above image may clarify.

    This junction is not appropriate for the voltages and gauge of
    wiring that I am using, but it is one of my favorite shades of
    green, so I really wanted to make it work.

|IMG_3481|

Having removed the old lighting and brackets, I shortened the wire
attached to the frame so that it would attach nicely to the interface.

|IMG_3484|

In addition, the junctions as originally designed were shrouded in a way
that inhibited screwdriver access. To circumvent this I shaved the top
of them to allow for a broader width of flatheads to turn them.

|IMG_3482|

 

Having completed the junction between the bicycle and pannier, I was
ready to mount the light. The light mounts simply with a few bolts and
has an identical interface as the previous light.

|IMG_3479|

Finally, with the light and wiring in place, I gave the front wheel
dynamo a turn, and- light!

|IMG_3483|

In the above picture, you can also see zip ties attaching the cabling to
the pannier rack. This would normally make it impossible to remove the
pannier rack, but because of our junction, it is now possible to do so
without removing the zip ties.

The Finished Product
====================

|IMG_3485|

Here's a final photo of everything reinstalled and all the wiring
securely zip tied. The install is completely stealthy and undetectable.

|IMG_3486|

Here is a picture of the bicycle light outside in full daylight in
standlicht mode (running on standby power when the dynamo is not
charging the light; e.g. at a traffic light).

Conclusions & Further Developments
==================================

Overall I am very satisfied with the bicycle light and install. In total
the cost was roughly 18 euros, the equivalent of purchasing the light
and installing at the bicycle store would have been 22 euros. Because I
installed it myself, I now have extra cabling, zip ties, junctions, and
a bike that is easier to service.

In the future, I would like to improve upon the junction between the
bicycle frame and pannier. Firstly, installing the junction to the bike
via zip ties is not a secure solution and places undue strain on the
connector. Secondly, it would vastly ease the connection/disconnection
of the junction if used crimp type connectors in conjunction. Because
the gauge of the wires is not large enough to easily make a secure
connection; it takes significant effort to line up the wires/securing
screw.

I hope you enjoyed this article, and thanks for reading!


.. |IMG_3323| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3323.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3466| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3466.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3474| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3474.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3473| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3473.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3477| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3477.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3476| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3476.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3478| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3478.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3480| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3480.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3481| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3481.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3484| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3484.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3482| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3482.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3479| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3479.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3483| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3483.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3485| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3485.jpg
   :class: pure-img
.. |IMG_3486| image:: {filename}/images/IMG_3486.jpg
   :class: pure-img

