Emacs Logo Redesign
###################
:date: 2016-09-21 06:26
:author: jmercouris
:category: Design
:slug: emacs-logo
:status: published
:description: A quick design study on a new Emacs logo.


The Problem
===========


The Emacs logo has always felt very incomplete, it has always looked
like a bunch of blue scribbles to me. Even looking at the aquamacs
logo it appears that it is a horse kind of scribbled on a purple
background.  Almost as if someone started drawing the logo, drew some
scribbles, and then decided on wrapping it in an early 2000s web
gradient.


The Interim Solution
====================


I originally started by taking icons from different text editors and
trying to copy them onto the Emacs app launcher. This worked okay, but
I would often confuse myself about which app I was trying to open. I
needed to find an icon that was uniquely Emacs specific, with a
pleasing aesthetic. To that end I decided to use an inverted version
of the Lisp user's group logo which can be found on Xah Lee's blog
ergoemacs (http://ergoemacs.org/emacs/lisp_logo.html).


|lisp_logo_big|


This was a great logo, and it worked for quite some time for me, but I
started to think that it wasn't quite Emacsy enough, I needed
something that was very Emacs specific, I needed an Elisp logo. Using
the same 70s era rounded text aesthetic, I crafted a version that
included an E.


|elisp_logo|


Though a little bit crude, and with artifacts of red throughout, it
worked pretty well and it confirmed for me visually that this concept
was possible, I decided to tweak it a little bit. What if I inverted
the E to emphasize that it was an Elisp logo?


|elisp_logo_inverted|


To be honest, I don't like it very much, but it was an intersting
idea.  Moving along, I treated the Elisp logo to the original
treatment I made for the Lisp logo to make it match with my computer's
icon theme, I changed it to all white.


|elisp_logo_white|


I think this design looks best and it is what I'll probably end up
using for my Emacs logo on my machine.


Finally, just for fun, a traditional Emacs purple verison:


|elisp_logo_purple|


Thank you for reading, I hope you enjoyed.

.. |lisp_logo_big| image:: {filename}/images/LISP_logo_big.png
   :class: pure-img
.. |elisp_logo| image:: {filename}/images/elisp_logo.png
   :class: pure-img
.. |elisp_logo_inverted| image:: {filename}/images/elisp_logo_inverted.png
   :class: pure-img
.. |elisp_logo_white| image:: {filename}/images/elisp_logo_white.png
   :class: pure-img
.. |elisp_logo_purple| image:: {filename}/images/elisp_logo_purple.png
   :class: pure-img
